Directory Structure Spec (#175)
notaryproject/notation: specs/directory.md

# Notation Directory Structure

The `notation` CLI requires local file systems support for the following components across various platforms.

- `notation` binary
- Plugins
- Configurations
- Trust stores
- Trust policies
- Signature caches
- Local key store

This documentation specifies the recommended directory structure for those components.

## Category

The directories for various components are classified into the following catagories.

| Alias     | Description                                                                         |
| --------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `BIN`     | Directory for executable binaries                                                   |
| `LIBEXEC` | Directory for binaries not meant to be executed directly by users' shell or scripts |
| `CONFIG`  | Directory for configurations                                                        |
| `CACHE`   | Directory for user-specific cache                                                   |

> Although it is recommended to install `notation` with its plugins and default configurations at the system level, it is possible to install at the user level.

Reviewer: Why we want user to install `notation` with its plugins and default configurations at the system level? Isnt user level more secure and isolated?

Author: `notation` may come with some default plugins or company-specific shared plugins.

For instance, `docker` has `docker-app` and `docker-buildx` bundled when `docker` CLI is installed.

Author: Of course, plugins can be installed at the user level.

On Unix systems, `notation` follows [Filesystem Hierarchy Standard][FHS] for system level directories and [XDG Base Directory Specification][XDG] for user level directories. On Windows, [Known Folders][KF] and [App Settings][AS] are followed equivalently. On Darwin, [macOS File System][macOS_FS] with [System Integrity Protection][SIP] is followed equivalently. If a file with the same name exists at the system level and the user level, the file at the user level takes over the priority.

### System Level

Default directory paths for various operating systems at system level are specified as below.

| Directory | Unix           | Windows                       | Darwin                         |
| --------- | -------------- | ----------------------------- | ------------------------------ |
| `BIN`     | `/usr/bin`     | `%ProgramFiles%/notation/bin` | `/usr/local/bin`               |

> | `LIBEXEC` | `/usr/libexec` | `%ProgramFiles%`              | `/usr/local/lib`               |

Author: I will add examples to demonstrate how the directories looks like on different platforms.

Author: Added examples

| `CONFIG`  | `/etc`         | `%ProgramData%`               | `/Library/Application Support` |

`CACHE` is omitted since it is user specific.

### User Level

Default directory paths for various operating systems at user level are specified as below.

| Directory | Unix               | Windows          | Darwin                          |
| --------- | ------------------ | ---------------- | ------------------------------- |
| `LIBEXEC` | `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME` | `%AppData%`      | `~/Library/Application Support` |
| `CONFIG`  | `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME` | `%AppData%`      | `~/Library/Application Support` |
| `CACHE`   | `$XDG_CACHE_HOME`  | `%LocalAppData%` | `~/Library/Caches`              |

There is no default `BIN` path at user level since the `notation` binary can be put anywhere as long as it in the `PATH` environment variable. Common directories on Unix/Darwin are `~/bin` and `~/.local/bin` where manual `PATH` update by users may be required.

## Structure

The overall directory structure for `notation` is summarized as follows.

```
{BIN}
└── notation
{CONFIG}
└── notation

>     ├── config.json

Reviewer 2: We discussed about moving signing keys into `signingKeys.json` for remote keys using plugins, and including only global notation config settings like `unsecureRegistry` into `config.json`.

Author: Added `signing/keys.json`.

>     ├── private

Reviewer 2: Is this for notation generated local keys only? What about local keys referred by `notation sign $IMAGE --keyFile somekey --certFile somecert` which could be in any location, assuming they won't be copied over here.

Author: Yes, exactly.

    │   ├── {key-name}.crt
    │   └── {key-name}.key
    └── trust
        ├── policy.json
        └── store
            └── {trust-store-type}
                └── {named-store}
                    └── {cert-file}
{CACHE}
└── notation
    └── signature
        └── {manifest-digest-algorithm}

>             └── {manifest-digest}

Author: No, we cannot because of the cross-platform support. On Windows, colon `:` in the path is not allowed.

                └── {signature-digest-algorithm}
                    └── {signature-digest}.sig
{LIBEXEC}
└── notation
    └── plugins

>         └── {plugin-name}

Reviewer: Do you mean Fully qualified name? Two plugin can have same name.

Author: Yes, please refer to the plugin spec for details. I will also have an example for that.

Author: Added a link to the plugin spec.

```

### General Configuration

The path of the general configuration file of the `notation` CLI is

```
{CONFIG}/notation/config.json
```

### Trust Store

The path of a certificate file in a [Trust Store][TS] follows the pattern of

```
{CONFIG}/notation/trust/store/{trust-store-type}/{named-store}/{cert-file}
```

### Trust Policy

The path of the [Trust Policy][TP] file is

```
{CONFIG}/notation/trust/policy.json
```

### Signature Caches

The signatures are cached to optimize the network traffic. The path of a cached signature for a certain manifest follows the pattern below.

```
{CACHE}/notation/signature/{manifest-digest-algorithm}/{manifest-digest}/{signature-digest-algorithm}/{signature-digest}.sig
```

or in a hierarchical view

```
{CACHE}
└── notation
    └── signature
        └── {manifest-digest-algorithm}
            └── {manifest-digest}
                └── {signature-digest-algorithm}
                    └── {signature-digest}.sig
```

### Local key store

Developers sign artifacts using local private keys with associated certificate chain. The default directory structure for testing purpose is suggested as follows.

```
{CONFIG}/notation/private/{key-name}.crt

> {CONFIG}/notation/private/{key-name}.key

Author: or we can do the older way:

```
{CONFIG}/notation/certificates/{key-name}.crt
{CONFIG}/notation/keys/{key-name}.pem
```

> {CONFIG}/notation/private/{key-name}.key

Reviewer 2: It's not clear by the directory names the purpose of keys and certificates. If these are local keys generated by notation, it's not clear why we need two directories, can you provide details/example of what the .crt and .pem contain (private keys and certificate chains).

> {CONFIG}/notation/private/{key-name}.key

Author: Usually, `.crt` is a certificate file or a certificate chain (a bundle of certificates). `.pem` can be a certificate or a key.

## Structure

The overall directory structure for `notation` is summarized as follows.

```
{BIN}
└── notation
{CACHE}
└── notation
    └── signature
        └── {manifest-digest-algorithm}
            └── {manifest-digest}
                └── {signature-digest-algorithm}
                    └── {signature-digest}.sig
{CONFIG}
└── notation
    ├── config.json
    ├── signing
    │   ├── certificates
    │   │   └── {key-name}.crt
    │   ├── keys
    │   │   └── {key-name}.pem
    │   └── keys.json
    └── trust
        ├── policy.json
        └── store
            └── {trust-store-type}
                └── {named-store}
                    └── {cert-file}
{LIBEXEC}
└── notation
    └── plugins
        └── {plugin-name}
            └── notation-{plugin-name}
```

### Notation Binary

The path for the `notation` binary is

```
{BIN}/notation
```

### Plugin

[Plugins][Plugin] are binaries not meant to be executed directly by users' shell or scripts. The path of a plugin follows the pattern below.

```

> {LIBEXEC}/notation/plugins/{plugin-name}/notation-{plugin-name}

Reviewer 3: Should we note that `windows` binaries must end with `.exe`? The extension is not part of `{plugin-name}`, so it can cause confusion for Windows developers reading this spec.

Author: Good catch. I'll also update the Windows example.

# Notation Directory Structure

The `notation` CLI requires local file systems support for the following components across various platforms.

- `notation` binary
- Plugins

> - Configurations

Author: `Configurations` means `Global configurations` / `System configurations` and `User configurations`.

| `CONFIG`  | Directory for configurations                                                        |
| `CACHE`   | Directory for user-specific cache                                                   |

Although it is recommended to install `notation` with its plugins and default configurations at the system level, it is possible to install at the user level.

On Unix systems, `notation` follows [Filesystem Hierarchy Standard][FHS] for system level directories and [XDG Base Directory Specification][XDG] for user level directories. On Windows, [Known Folders][KF] and [App Settings][AS] are followed equivalently. On Darwin, [macOS File System][macOS_FS] with [System Integrity Protection][SIP] is followed equivalently. If a file with the same name exists at the system level and the user level, the file at the user level takes over the priority.

### System Level

Default directory paths for various operating systems at system level are specified as below.

| Directory | Unix           | Windows                       | Darwin                         |
| --------- | -------------- | ----------------------------- | ------------------------------ |

> | `BIN`     | `/usr/bin`     | `%ProgramFiles%/notation/bin` | `/usr/local/bin`               |

Reviewer 2: On Windows %ProgramFiles% generally has sub directories for each application, with each dir containing all the files it needs (unlike say MacOS .app file). 
I don't think it's not typical for Windows apps to have `bin` directory though, `%ProgramFiles%/notation/notation` should suffice.

> | `BIN`     | `/usr/bin`     | `%ProgramFiles%/notation/bin` | `/usr/local/bin`               |

Author: It is actually common to have `bin` directory under the program folder. For instance,

```
C:\Users\<user_name>\AppData\Local\Programs\Microsoft VS Code\bin
C:\Program Files (x86)\Microsoft SDKs\Azure\CLI2\wbin
C:\Program Files\Go\bin
```

The advantage of having a `bin` folder is that it is safter to add the `bin` folder with executables only to the `PATH` environment variable.

| `LIBEXEC` | `/usr/libexec` | `%ProgramFiles%`              | `/usr/local/lib`               |
| `CONFIG`  | `/etc`         | `%ProgramData%`               | `/Library/Application Support` |

`CACHE` is omitted since it is user specific.

### User Level

Default directory paths for various operating systems at user level are specified as below.

> | Directory | Unix               | Windows          | Darwin                          |

Author: Added default path for `XDG_*`.

| --------- | ------------------ | ---------------- | ------------------------------- |

> | `LIBEXEC` | `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME` | `%AppData%`      | `~/Library/Application Support` |

Author: I'd like to follow the strategy of docker CLI that user plugins are stored under the config folder for easier management.

Reference: https://github.com/docker/cli/issues/1534

| `CONFIG`  | `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME` | `%AppData%`      | `~/Library/Application Support` |
| `CACHE`   | `$XDG_CACHE_HOME`  | `%LocalAppData%` | `~/Library/Caches`              |

There is no default `BIN` path at user level since the `notation` binary can be put anywhere as long as it in the `PATH` environment variable. Common directories on Unix/Darwin are `~/bin` and `~/.local/bin` where manual `PATH` update by users may be required.

## Structure

The overall directory structure for `notation` is summarized as follows.

```
{BIN}
└── notation
{CACHE}
└── notation

>     └── signature

Reviewer 2: Rename to `notation/signatures` ?

        └── {manifest-digest-algorithm}
            └── {manifest-digest}
                └── {signature-digest-algorithm}

>                     └── {signature-digest}.sig

Reviewer 2: Is there a reason we need a sub directory for `{signature-digest-algorithm}`, a given manifest digest will only contain one signature. 
Is `{manifest-digest}` the artifact manifest digest or signature manifest digest, maybe update the dir structure to make that clearer.

Author: A manifest may have multiple signatures signed by various parties.

The `{manifest-digest}` is the digest of the subject manifest. i.e. The manifest to be signed.

Author: The section `Signature Caches` clarifies that the manifest is the manifest to be signed.

{CONFIG}
└── notation
    ├── config.json
    ├── signing
    │   ├── certificates
    │   │   └── {key-name}.crt
    │   ├── keys
    │   │   └── {key-name}.pem
    │   └── keys.json
    └── trust
        ├── policy.json
        └── store
            └── {trust-store-type}
                └── {named-store}

>                     └── {cert-file}

Reviewer 4: I feel these paths are bit lengthy to traverse manually. Can we use shorter ones like below?
```
{CONFIG}/notation/signing-keys/{key-name}/cert.pem
{CONFIG}/notation/signing-keys/{key-name}/key.pem
{CONFIG}/notation/trust-store/{trust-store-type}/*
{CONFIG}/notation/trust-policy.json
```

I personally feel shorter paths are easier to use. Would like to hear others opinions. @gokarnm what do you think?

Reviewer 2: I don't have strong opinions, but current dir structure has some additional levels due to `notation\signing` and `notation\trust`. @shizhMSFT is there a benefit to having these sub directories, anything we loose by flattening the structure?

 Things to consider

1. Users will initially have to be aware of some paths the dir structure when we don't provide them CLI command (mainly trust policy and trust store), so we can keep paths short as long as they are clear and unambiguous.
2. Administrators who will deploy trust stores and policies will not use CLI commands, they will copy files in specific locations. 

I like the suggestion of combining the `signing/certificates` and `signing/keys` to `signing-keys/{key-name}`. My suggestions.

```
{CONFIG}/notation/signingKeys.json
{CONFIG}/notation/trustPolicy.json
{CONFIG}/notation/config.json
{CONFIG}/notation/signing-keys/{key-name}/cert.crt 
{CONFIG}/notation/signing-keys/{key-name}/key.pem 
{CONFIG}/notation/trust-store/{trust-store-type}/* 
```

Author: `trust/store` and `trust/policy` are better than `trust-store` and `trust-policy` as they are all under `trust` and are well organized. It also avoids naming convention. For example, `signing-keys` and `signingKeys` are not consistency in terms of naming.

Author: > Administrators who will deploy trust stores and policies will not use CLI commands, they will copy files in specific locations.

They will deploy those using scripts, not drag-and-drop GUIs.

Reviewer 4: > trust/store and trust/policy are better than trust-store and trust-policy as they are all under trust and are well organized. 

The path `{CONFIG}/notation/trust` is ambiguous. It exists on the file system but does not provide any real value. The flattened structure is better as each and every possible path is self-explanatory.

Now that I understand better about these files, I propose below structure
```
{CONFIG}/notation/signingkeys.json
{CONFIG}/notation/trustpolicy.json
{CONFIG}/notation/config.json
{CONFIG}/notation/local-keys/{key-name}/cert.pem
{CONFIG}/notation/local-keys/{key-name}/key.pem
{CONFIG}/notation/local-keys/{key-name}/chain.pem 
{CONFIG}/notation/trust-store/{trust-store-type}/* 
```

AFAIK camel case for multi-word config file names (trustPolicy.json, signingKeys.json) is not common (for example `.gitconfig` or `.gitignore`). I tried to look for any examples in docker but couldn't find any.

Author: The folder name `local-keys` seems making more sense than `signing-keys`.

BTW, should we remove all hyphens? so we have `truststore` and `localkeys`?

{LIBEXEC}
└── notation
    └── plugins
        └── {plugin-name}
            └── notation-{plugin-name}
```

### Notation Binary

The path for the `notation` binary is

```
{BIN}/notation
```

On Windows, the `.exe` extension is required for executables.

```
{BIN}/notation.exe
```

### Plugin

[Plugins][Plugin] are binaries not meant to be executed directly by users' shell or scripts. The path of a plugin follows the pattern below.

```
{LIBEXEC}/notation/plugins/{plugin-name}/notation-{plugin-name}
```

On Windows, the `.exe` extension is required for executables.

```
{LIBEXEC}/notation/plugins/{plugin-name}/notation-{plugin-name}.exe
```

### General Configuration

The path of the general configuration file of the `notation` CLI is

```

> {CONFIG}/notation/config.json

Author: This is out of the scope of this document. We should have a separate documentation for config.

```

### Trust Store

The path of a certificate file in a [Trust Store][TS] follows the pattern of

```
{CONFIG}/notation/trust/store/{trust-store-type}/{named-store}/{cert-file}
```

### Trust Policy

The path of the [Trust Policy][TP] file is

```
{CONFIG}/notation/trust/policy.json
```

### Signature Caches

> The signatures are cached to optimize the network traffic. The path of a cached signature for a certain manifest follows the pattern below.

Reviewer 2: Can you provide some more details here for my benefit, we can probably capture the details in another doc. How does caching work, given that additional signatures will be added over time. Will notation-go always call references API and skip downloading signature blobs it has already downloaded? We still have to download signature manifests every time, correct?

```
{CACHE}/notation/signature/{manifest-digest-algorithm}/{manifest-digest}/{signature-digest-algorithm}/{signature-digest}.sig
```

or in a hierarchical view

```
{CACHE}
└── notation
    └── signature
        └── {manifest-digest-algorithm}
            └── {manifest-digest}
                └── {signature-digest-algorithm}
                    └── {signature-digest}.sig
```

### Signing Key Store

Developers sign artifacts using local private keys with associated certificate chain. The signing key information is tracked in a JSON file at

```

> {CONFIG}/notation/signing/keys.json

Reviewer 2: [Plugin signing keys](https://github.com/notaryproject/notaryproject/blob/main/specs/plugin-extensibility.md#using-a-plugin-for-signing) will go into keys.json, I'm not sure if we'll support local keys generated by notation too in the same file, @shizhMSFT ?

> {CONFIG}/notation/signing/keys.json

Reviewer 4: Should we call it `local-keys.json`?

```

> Since the signing key store is user-specific, the system level `{CONFIG}` is not recommended. Developers SHOULD consider safe places to store the passphrase-protected key and certificate pairs, or opt to remote signing.

Author: In the most case, it is not recommended. However, what if there are computer-level signing keys?

> Since the signing key store is user-specific, the system level `{CONFIG}` is not recommended. Developers SHOULD consider safe places to store the passphrase-protected key and certificate pairs, or opt to remote signing.

Reviewer 4: These keys are generated by notation, correct? If yes, where does notation generate these keys? user config or system config? If former, then how can keys exist in system config?

> Since the signing key store is user-specific, the system level `{CONFIG}` is not recommended. Developers SHOULD consider safe places to store the passphrase-protected key and certificate pairs, or opt to remote signing.

Author: The only way for notation to generate keys is for test purpose, i.e. `notation cert generate-test`. The resulted keys are in the user config. For those keys in the system config, they are usually configured by the system admins.

For testing purpose, the following directory structure is suggested.

```
{CONFIG}/notation/signing/certificates/{key-name}.crt
{CONFIG}/notation/signing/keys/{key-name}.pem
```

Since `keys.json` takes references in absolute paths, it is not required to copy the private keys and certificates used for signing to the above directory structure.

## Examples

Examples are shown on various platforms where the user `exampleuser` overrides the `notation` config and the trust policy.

### Unix

```
/
├── etc
│   └── notation
│       ├── config.json
│       └── trust
│           ├── policy.json

> │           └── store

Author: Good catch. It should be `x509/ca` and `x509/tsa` according to [trust-store spec](https://github.com/notaryproject/notaryproject/blob/9cfd6a91b1dfad48886af17edf7cc8235556f550/trust-store-trust-policy-specification.md#trust-store).

The `notation` CLI requires local file systems support for the following components across various platforms.

- `notation` binary
- Plugins
- Configurations
- Trust stores
- Trust policies
- Signature caches
- Signing key store

This documentation specifies the recommended directory structure for those components.

## Category

The directories for various components are classified into the following catagories.

| Alias     | Description                                                                         |
| --------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `BIN`     | Directory for executable binaries                                                   |
| `LIBEXEC` | Directory for binaries not meant to be executed directly by users' shell or scripts |
| `CONFIG`  | Directory for configurations                                                        |
| `CACHE`   | Directory for user-specific cache                                                   |

Although it is recommended to install `notation` with its plugins and default configurations at the system level, it is possible to install at the user level.

> On Unix systems, `notation` follows [Filesystem Hierarchy Standard][FHS] for system level directories and [XDG Base Directory Specification][XDG] for user level directories. On Windows, [Known Folders][KF] and [App Settings][AS] are followed equivalently. On Darwin, [macOS File System][macOS_FS] with [System Integrity Protection][SIP] is followed equivalently. If a file with the same name exists at the system level and the user level, the file at the user level takes over the priority.

Reviewer 2: This makes sense from a usability perspective for certain components like config.json, but seems inverse of what is desired for trust store and trust policy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On Unix systems, `notation` follows [Filesystem Hierarchy Standard][FHS] for system level directories and [XDG Base Directory Specification][XDG] for user level directories. On Windows, [Known Folders][KF] and [App Settings][AS] are followed equivalently. On Darwin, [macOS File System][macOS_FS] with [System Integrity Protection][SIP] is followed equivalently.

**TODO** : If a file with the same name exists at the system level and the user level, the mechanism to resolve priority needs to be defined (tracked in #203).

```

            └── {trust-store-type}
                └── {named-store}
                    └── {cert-file}
{LIBEXEC}
└── notation
    └── plugins
        └── {plugin-name}
            └── notation-{plugin-name}
```

### Notation Binary

The path for the `notation` binary is

```
{BIN}/notation
```

On Windows, the `.exe` extension is required for executables.

```
{BIN}/notation.exe
```

### Plugin

[Plugins][Plugin] are binaries not meant to be executed directly by users' shell or scripts. The path of a plugin follows the pattern below.

```
{LIBEXEC}/notation/plugins/{plugin-name}/notation-{plugin-name}
```

On Windows, the `.exe` extension is required for executables.

```
{LIBEXEC}/notation/plugins/{plugin-name}/notation-{plugin-name}.exe
```

### General Configuration

The path of the general configuration file of the `notation` CLI is

```
{CONFIG}/notation/config.json
```

### Trust Store

The path of a certificate file in a [Trust Store][TS] follows the pattern of

```
{CONFIG}/notation/trust/store/{trust-store-type}/{named-store}/{cert-file}
```

### Trust Policy

The path of the [Trust Policy][TP] file is

```
{CONFIG}/notation/trust/policy.json
```

### Signature Caches

> The signatures are cached to optimize the network traffic. The path of a cached signature for a certain manifest follows the pattern below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The signatures are cached to optimize the network traffic. The path of a cached signatures for a certain target manifest (e.g. an image manifest) follows the pattern below.

```

```
{CACHE}/notation/signatures/{manifest-digest-algorithm}/{manifest-digest}/{signature-digest-algorithm}/{signature-digest}.sig
```

or in a hierarchical view

```
{CACHE}
└── notation
    └── signatures
        └── {manifest-digest-algorithm}
            └── {manifest-digest}

>                 └── {signature-digest-algorithm}

Reviewer 2: Should we rename `{signature-digest-algorithm}` to `{signature-blob-digest-algorithm}` to make it clearer, I (incorrectly) assumed this was related to signing algorithm hash earlier and that was confusing.
